SQL Practice

This page contains a few SQL questions for your practice. These are also some common interview questions and are intended for your practice.

 

For the following questions, you need to use the 'world' database which comes built-in with MySQL workbench. It contains information on various cities, countries, their demographics, the languages spoken etc. 

 

In case you cannot find the database in your MySQL Workbench, you can download it from the MySQL website from the following URLs:

    Download the world database  https://dev.mysql.com/doc/index-other.html
    Instructions to set up the world database https://downloads.mysql.com/docs/world-setup-en.pdf

 

You are expected to write queries in the commented file provided below and attempt the following questions. 

Refer Commented File - World Database

Questions:1/12
Count of Cities

How many cities are there in the cities table?
 
1079
2079
3079
4079 - correct
Feedback : This is straightforward: select count (*) from city

Questions:2/12
Number of Cities

Which country has the highest number of cities in the database?
China
Feedback : There are at least two ways to do this: 1) Grouping the number of cities by CountryCode and arranging in descending order and 2) Using sub queries (provided in the solution)
Correct
India
United States
Brazil

Questions:3/12
The most widely spoken official language

 Which language is its country’s official language and spoken by 80 to 90 percent of people?
 
Albanian
Spanish
Feedback : This is also easy: select * from countrylanguage where IsOfficial = "T" and Percentage between 80 and 90
Correct
French
Hindi

Questions:4/12
Cities in Maharashtra

In India, how many cities have been listed in “Maharashtra” district?
 
21
28
35
Feedback : Use a simple count(*) to count the number of rows where district is Maharashtra. One solution is select count(*) as count_MH from city where District = "Maharashtra"
Correct
42

Questions:5/12
Most populous country

Which country has the maximum population (If population is taken as the population of the country table)?
 
China
Feedback : select * from Country where population = (select max(population) from country)
Correct
India
Brazil
USA

Which row is max

Which language is spoken in the maximum number of countries? We recommend reading the following SO answer before attempting the question.

URL: Stack Overflow (having versus where)

 
English
Feedback : select language,count(*) as number from countrylanguage group by language order by number desc
Correct
Arabic
Spanish
French

Questions:7/12
Most common official language

Among the given options, which language is the official language of the most number of countries?
Tamil
Portuguese
Feedback : select language,count(*) as number from countrylanguage where IsOfficial = "T" group by language order by number desc
Correct
Dutch
Turkish

Questions:8/12
English speaking cities in North America

How many cities in the continent North America are there where English is the official language?

309

319

329

339
Feedback :

This is a join problem. You can see the ideal solution on the next page.


Questions:9/12
Maximum population

Which city has the maximum population among these cities?
Phoenix
Los Angeles
Chicago
New York
Feedback : This is a simple order by problem. Order the 4 cities by population. This is the smart way to do it in case of an MCQ exam. Otherwise you can use multiple join. The solution is provided in the solutions script.


Questions:10/12
NULL values

How many row entries are there with any value in the country table being NULL?
 
72
Feedback : Use “Is Null” for all the columns. The sample solution is provided in the solution script.
Correct
92
112
132

Questions:11/12
I***A

How many countries are there whose name starts with I and ends with A
 
1
2
Feedback : select * from country where name like "I%A"
Correct
3
4
Questions:12/12
Least surface area

Which continent has least surface area?


 

Europe

Oceania
Feedback :

The correct answer is :select continent, sum(SurfaceArea) from country group by Continent order by sum(SurfaceArea);"
Correct

Antarctica

Asia











