Introduction

Welcome to the session on ‘Linear Regression: Industry Relevance’. While you have learnt the theoretical aspects of linear regression, it is more important to learn how it is implemented in the industry. 

 

In this module

In this session, you will get an insight into the relevance and use of linear regression modelling in industries. Ujjyaini, our subject matter expert, will take you through a real-life example that will let you assess what you have understood so far, give you an idea of the industry applications of linear regression, and help you get ready for the industry.

Guidelines for in-module questions

The in-video and in-content questions for this module are not graded. 

People you will hear from in this module

Subject Matter Expert

Ujjyani Mitra

Analytics & Data Science Leader & Mentor - Driving Data to Decision (Viacom18, Flipkart, Bharti Airtel, McKinsey & Co)

Linear Regression: Revision

You have already practised linear regression modelling in previous sessions. Let’s revise some of the concepts you learnt.

Here, Ujjyaini mentioned that regression guarantees interpolation of data and not extrapolation.

 

Interpolation basically means using the model to predict the value of a dependent variable on independent values that lie within the range of data you already have. Extrapolation, on the other hand, means predicting the dependent variable on the independent values that lie outside the range of the data the model was built on.

 

To understand this better, look at the diagram below. The model is built on values of x between a and b.


Figure 1: Interpolation vs Extrapolation

 

When you wish to predict the Y for X1, which lies between a and b, it is called interpolation. On the other hand, extrapolation would be extending the line to predict Y for X2 which lies outside the range on which the linear model was trained.

 

For now, you only need to understand what these terms mean. You will learn more about this in the upcoming lectures.

 

Ujjyaini also mentioned that linear regression is a parametric model, as opposed to non-parametric ones.

 

A detailed discussion on parametric and non-parametric models is beyond the discussion of this module, though a simple explanation is given below. You may also read up the additional resources given below.

 

In simple terms, a parametric model can be described using a finite number of parameters. For e.g., a linear regression model built using n independent variables will have exactly n ‘parameters’ (i.e. the n coefficients). The entire model can be described using these n parameters.

 

In the upcoming modules, you will learn some ‘non-parametric’ models as well, such as decision trees.

They do not have a finite set of parameters which completely describe the model.

 

To read up on this topic further, here are some useful links:

    Parametric v/s non parametric models in short  https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/268638/confusion-about-parametric-and-non-parametric-model
    A detailed explanation on parametric and non-parametric models  https://machinelearningmastery.com/parametric-and-nonparametric-machine-learning-algorithms/

 

It is very crucial to understand when to apply linear regression modelling. Let us go through some business cases to understand where you can apply linear regression modelling.

 

You saw various cases and learnt where linear regression modelling can be used and where it can’t. Answer the question below to test your understanding.
Questions:1/1
 
Using Linear Regression

In which of the following cases can linear regression be used?
UpGrad is looking to admit new students in its Data Analytics Program. Potential students are asked to fill various parameters such as previous company, grades, experience, etc. They need this data to figure out if an applicant would be a good fit for the program.
Feedback :
This is a classification problem.
Incorrect
Flipkart is trying to analyse user details and past purchases to identify segments where users can be targeted for advertisements.
A researcher wishes to find out the amount of rainfall on a given day, given that pressure, temperature and wind conditions are known.
Feedback :
Past data could be used to predict what the rainfall will be based on the given predictors.
Correct
A startup is analysing the data of potential customers. They need to figure out which people they should reach out for a sales pitch.


Prediction vs Projection

In the last lecture, you learnt when linear regression modelling can be applied.

 

You will often hear the terms prediction and projection interchangeably, but in terms of modelling, these are different applications. Let’s learn the difference between them.

Questions:1/1
 
Projection

Which of the following are true in case of projection?
Projection focuses on the identification of variables that are important in explaining the outcome, rather than how good the final outcome is
Feedback : The focus is not on the identification of important variables, but getting an accurate final outcome.
Incorrect
While making a projection, it is assumed that the conditions in which the model was built continue to be the same
Feedback : Forecast assumes that conditions remain the same as they were when the model was built.
CorrectYou missed this!
It is better to get a simple model with lower accuracy than a complex model with high accuracy
The accuracy of the final outcome is more important than the identification of the most important driver variables
Feedback : While making a projection, the aim is accuracy. Thus, a complex model containing a large number of variables, with high accuracy is more valuable than a simple model with lower accuracy.


In the previous segment, you got a basic idea of interpolation and extrapolation. Let us now learn more about these in detail.

In this lecture, you learnt that linear regression can be effectively used for interpolation, but extrapolation may not necessarily be effective/accurate.

 

In the next lecture, you will look at a case study for a media company.

Media Company Case Study

From the business cases we considered for the application of linear regression, you may recall the case of a media company. This case is quite similar.

 

The problem statement is as follows - A digital media company (similar to Voot, Hotstar, Netflix, etc.) had launched a show. Initially, the show got a good response, but then witnessed a decline in viewership. The company wants to figure out what went wrong.

 

You can download the dataset, data dictionary & the IPython notebook from below:
Media Company data set
file_downloadDownload
Data Dictionary
file_downloadDownload

 

Let’s see how linear regression can be used to identify the root cause of decline in viewership.
Python Code
file_downloadDownload

Let us now understand the data that we will use to derive our insights. You should open the Media Company data set that you downloaded above.

You looked at the digital media company data set. You understood the various attributes that could have led to the decline in the new show’s viewership. In the next lecture, you will see exploratory data analysis on the data set.

 
Additional Readings:

Read to understand more about Ad Impressions (here https://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/219695/the-definition-of-an-ad-impression.html)


Exploratory Data Analysis

Let’s try and see what we can learn from the data before going deeper into it.


Model Building I

To arrive at a data-driven solution, you would use a linear regression model with an aim to understand what the predictors/driver KPIs for viewership are. Then, based on the model, you will be able to determine the root cause of the viewership decline.

 

Let us now dive into model building. Our SME Ujjyaini will illustrate the model building process through the forward selection method, which you learnt about in variable selection. You would have already downloaded the Python notebook for the case study. If not, you can download the same from the link below.
Python Code
file_downloadDownload

Our subject matter expert first began the model with variables that seem the most important at the first instance. The model was updated with the change in variables, and the addition of new variables, that help explain the outcome better.

 

The first question you tried to answer was whether the decline in Visitors to the platform the main reason for the decline in the show viewership. You started with a weekday variable, and then replaced it with weekend variable to help explain the spikes in the graph better. Then you added the Character A variable, which shows the impact of the character's presence in the show Viewership.

 

Intuitively it appears that the number of views today must be related to the views yesterday, e.g. if you had viewers watching the show yesterday, a large proportion of them are also expected to watch the show today. 

 

In the code provided, the lag variable has already been created. Run the model including the lag variable along with the Weekend, Visitor and Character A variables and answer the following question.

Questions:1/2
 
 
Lag Views

Is Lag_views a significant predictor of Show_views, when modelled along "Weekend", "Visitors" and "Character_A"?
Yes
Feedback :
For Lag_views, p<0.05. Thus, Lag_views is a significant predictor of the viewership of the show.
Correct
No

Questions:2/2
 
 
Correlation

What is the correlation between Lag_views and Views_show?
0.74
Feedback :
Incorrect. Use cor().
Incorrect
0.89
0.42
Feedback :
Correct. The correlation between Lag_views and Views_show is 0.42.
Correct
0.2

Model Building II

Let us now look at the subsequent steps in model building.

On the introduction of more variables, the model starts gaining complexity. Some of the variables, which were significant earlier, now become insignificant. Variables which have better alternatives are replaced. You brought back variables which were previously removed to test if they fit the business requirement better. For example, you brought back Visitors as a predictor against Views to the platform, because Visitors could be impacted through marketing actions.

Questions:1/1
 
Finding Correlation

What is the correlation between Views_platform and Visitors?

43

94
Feedback :

Correct. Since there is such a high correlation between Visitors and Views on the platform, replacing Views_platform with Visitors made no significant difference.
Correct

78

62
Feedback :

Try again. Use cor() function.

In the latest version of the model (Model 6), Ujjyaini spotted two major problems -

    The variable ‘Visitors’ has become insignificant with a large p-value and
    The variable ‘character A’ has changed its sign.

 

Before proceeding ahead, answer the following questions

Questions:1/2
 
 
Visitors

Why do you think Visitor's significance dropped upon the introduction of the Ad Impressions variable? Write your answer in the text box below.
Suggested Answer-
There is a significant correlation between Ad Impressions and Visitors. Thus, after the introduction of Ad Impressions, Visitors became an insignificant variable.

CharacterA

Think of some possible reasons that the variable ‘character_A’ has changed its sign. Write your answer in the text box below.
Suggested Answer-
CharacterA has a high correlation with Ad impressions. A change of sign upon the introduction of new variables suggests multicollinearity.

Model Building III

Let us continue the process of model building.

In the process of building the model, you checked for multiple variables and then arrived at the variables that best suited the model.

 

Based on your understanding of the models, answer the following questions :-


uestions:1/2
 
 
Cricket Match

A cricket match between Australia and India is happening over the weekend. Should the producers be worried about losing show viewers to the match?
Yes
No
Feedback :
Cricket Matches (featuring India) was found to be insignificant in explaining show viewership. Thus, the cricket match would not impact show viewership.

Now that you have a model, with a fairly high adjusted R-squared, it might seem that the task is done. But you still might be missing out on an important variable. Thus, you need to assess the model. In the following lectures, you will learn some important methods of assessing the model and confirming that the model you arrived at was the best you could have, given the data you have.



 

 
