Summary

Here's a brief summary of what you learned in this session: 

    Machine learning models can be classified into following two categories on the basis of learning algorithm:
        Supervised learning method: Past data with labels is available to build the model
            Regression: The output variable is continuous in nature
            Classification: The output variable is categorical in nature
        Unsupervised learning method: Past data with labels are not available
            Clustering: No pre-defined notion of labels is there
    Past data set is divided into two parts during supervised learning method: 
        Training data  is used for the model to learn during modelling
        Testing data is used by the trained model for prediction and model evaluation
    Linear regression models can be classified into two types depending upon the number of independent variables: 
        Simple linear regression: When the number of independent variables is 1
        Multiple linear regression: When the number of independent variables is more than 1
    The equation of the best fit regression line Y = β₀ + β₁X can be found by minimising the cost function (RSS in this case, using the Ordinary Least Squares method) which is done using the following two methods:
        Differentiation
        Gradient descent method
    The strength of a linear regression model is mainly explained by R²,  where R² = 1 - (RSS / TSS)
        RSS: Residual Sum of Squares
        TSS: Total Sum of Squares
        
        
        
 Graded Questions
 
 Questions:1/1
 
Machine Learning Models

A Singapore-based startup Healin launched an app called JustShakeIt that enables a user to send an emergency alert to emergency contacts and/or caregivers simply by shaking the phone with one hand. The program uses a machine learning algorithm to distinguish between actual emergency shakes and everyday jostling, using data with labels to distinguish between everyday jostling and emergency shaking.

What kind of problem is this?
Supervised learning - Regression
Supervised learning - Classification
Feedback :
The algorithm has to distinguish between actual emergency shakes and everyday jostling. Here, your output variable has pre-defined labels (shake/jostle), which are categorical in nature. So, this is a supervised learning - classification problem.
Correct
Unsupervised learning - Clustering
Can’t say with this information


Questions:1/1
 
Regression in Machine Learning

Select all the tasks where linear regression algorithm can be applied.

More than 1 option can be correct.

You have a data set of BMI (body-mass index) and fat percentage of customers of a fitness centre. Now, the fitness centre wants to predict the fat percentage of a new customer given his BMI.
Feedback :

Here, the output variable (dependent variable which is to be predicted) is fat percentage, which is a numeric variable. So this is a regression task.
Correct

You have collected data from a house rental website such as commonfloor.com. The data has the rental prices of apartments and customer ratings as HIGH or LOW. You want to predict the customer rating given the rental price of a new house.

You want to predict the sales of a retail store based on its size, given the data set of sales of retail stores and their sizes.
Feedback :

Here, the output variable (dependent variable which is to be predicted) is sales, which is a numeric variable. So this is a regression task.
Correct

You want to predict whether a customer is likely to leave the telecom network.

Questions:1/1
 
Coefficients of Regression Equation

The independent variable X from a linear regression is measured in miles. If you convert it to kilometres (keeping the unit of the dependent Y variable same), how would the slope coefficient change? (1 mile = 1.6 km)
It would get multiplied by 1.6
It would get divided by 1.6
Feedback :
In the linear regression equation, X gets multiplied by 1.6 with no change in Y. So slope will be divided by 1.6.
Correct
It would remain the same
Can’t say

Questions:1/1
 
Strength of Regression Model

You want to find out the linear relation between the number of X-ray machines purchased at one time and the cost per machine. The following data has been obtained on the same:
X: Number of machines purchased	1	3	6	10	15
Y: Cost per widget (in thousand rupees)	89	85	79	73	64

Suppose the R² between X and Y is 0.87. Which of the following conclusions you can make from this?
The linear relation between X and Y is weak, and their correlation would be positive
The linear relation between X and Y is weak, and their correlation would be negative
The linear relation between X and Y is strong, and their correlation would be positive
The linear relation between X and Y is strong, and their correlation would be negative
Feedback :
A higher value of R² means a strong linear relation. As Y is decreasing with the increasing value of X, you can conclude that their correlation would be negative.

