Introduction
In the previous session, you learnt the basics of R – mostly revolving around different data structures in R.

This session’s objective is to take your skills in R to an intermediate level, where you'll learn some more new tools (or constructs, what Prof RC generally calls it), which are common to most programming languages.

 

You will apply all the skills learnt in the previous session on a bank marketing case study and use it to learn the new constructs in a hands-on way.

 

Download the Bank Marketing data file and the R script for this session from the links below. We recommend you to work alongside the lectures in your R-Studio.

Bankfile_download	Download
Intermediatefile_download	Download
Recall what you learnt in the last session in this quick lecture and get ready for the case study.

Logical and Relational Operators
In this lecture, you’ll learn to apply relational and logical operators.

Comprehension - Discussion Forum Analytics - 1

 

Do you ever wonder how your Discussion Forum points are calculated based on your activity in the forum?  Let’s try to understand the interesting analytics behind it.

 

Two active members A and B always try to answer as many questions as possible on the forum. On the last 6 common questions which both of them answered on the forum, they received few upvotes which are recorded as vectors as given below:

A_upvotes <- c(7, 3, 2, 8, 0, 4)
B_upvotes <- c(2, 1, 3, 4, 2, 4)
 

The following questions will help you understand how answer upvotes’ data can be analysed.

Conditional Statements
You will now study a commonly used construct - the "if-else" conditional statement. As the name implies, conditional statements are used to implement code if some predefined condition is satisfied. Let’s see how it works.   

Summary

You learnt if-else statements in this segment. Aren’t they bringing a cool automatic decision-making ability to your plate of R programming?

 

Additional Resources

Check this link to go through more examples of writing 'if-else' statements in R. --https://www.datamentor.io/r-programming/if-else-statement/

Loops
Loops are used when you have to repeat a task multiple times. In R programming and data analysis, loops are mostly used to apply a particular logic over a sequence of data items/objects.

Apart from the ‘for’ loop, there are other loops as well, like ‘while’ and ‘repeat’. There also exist statements like break( ) and next( ) which can be used inside loops in certain situations. You don’t need to worry about them at this moment; you can learn them easily later when needed.

 

Comprehension - Discussion Forum Analytics - 2

Let’s again go back to our previous example of Discussion Forum analytics, where we recorded the answer upvotes of A & B for the last 6 questions on the forum.

A_upvotes <- c(7, 3, 2, 8, 0, 4)
B_upvotes <- c(2, 1, 3, 4, 2, 4)

https://www.datamentor.io/r-programming/for-loop/

Functions
You have already used functions in R - mean(), sqrt(), exp(), etc. These functions are called built-in functions. Study a few more useful functions by applying them on the bank dataset.

Comprehension - Discussion Forum Analytics - 3

 

Let’s again go back to our previous example of Discussion Forum analytics, where the answer upvotes of A & B were recorded for the last 6 questions on the forum.

A_upvotes <- c(7, 3, 2, 8, 0, 4)
B_upvotes <- c(2, 1, 3, 4, 2, 4)
