Public and Private Data

There are two major kinds of data which can be classified according to the source:

    Public data

    Private data

A large amount of data collected by the government or other public agencies is made public for the purposes of research. Such data sets do not require special permission for access and are therefore called public data.

 

On the other hand, private data is that which is sensitive to organisations and is thus not available in the public domain. Banking, telecom, retail, and media are some of the key private sectors that rely heavily on data to make decisions.

 

Let’s listen to Anand talk about these types of data sets and how you can access them.

To summarise, there are two types of data - public and private, and each has its own problem. Public data isn’t always relevant and private data isn’t always easily available.

 

In the next lecture, you will learn about the various kinds of private data.

 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS (FAQ)
1
My answer does not match  with the given  solution

Irrespective of whether it is a coding question or a normal MCQ, first, please verify your solution with the given feedback thoroughly. After that please check the Discussion Forum to see if anyone else had faced a similar issue.If not then please ask the question there to see if your peers are able to resolve the issue.Please raise a ticket only after you have done the previous steps and are still unable to resolve your issue.
2
My video doesn't play properly

Please check the following link: http://help.upgrad.com/learning-platform/video-playback-issues
3
My progress is stuck/ Unable to proceed to the next section

Please check the following link:

http://help.upgrad.com/learning-platform/unable-to-click-on-the-next-button-at-the-end-of-a-page-to-move-to-the-next-section.

 
Private Data

A large number of organisations seek to leverage data analytics to make crucial decisions. As organisations become customer-centric, they utilise insights from data to enhance customer experience, while also optimising their daily processes.

 

Let's listen to Anand about how data in the banking, telecom and HR industries looks like and how it helps the companies make crucial decisions.

You learnt the use of data in the banking, telecom and human resources sectors. While banks use data to make credit related decisions, telecoms use data to optimise plans for customers and predict customer churn. HR data analytics helps identify and predict employee behaviour.

 

Let us now look at the applications of data analytics in retail and media, and what this data looks like.

In this lecture, you learnt the applications of data in the media and retail industries.

 

While retail data analytics helps drive decisions such as pricing and stocking, the media industry uses data extensively to target viewers better. Advertisers use data to identify the best avenues for targeting customers, while journalists use data visualisation to aid information.

 

In the next lecture, you will learn about public data and how to source it.

EDA

Which of the following purposes could data analytics be used for in the HR industry? More than one options may be correct.
Predicting which people would be the right fit for hiring
Feedback : HR analytics is used to hire the right candidates, who would stay longer with the company and would be a good fit for the company culture. Prospective employee's previous engagements and traits could be matched up against the available employee data to come to a decision.
Correct
Identifying who would be more successful as a leader in the company
Feedback : Using the behavior data of past & current employees, HR analytics can be used to predict which employee is likely to be a better leader.
Correct
Predicting when people are likely to leave their jobs
Feedback : Using data such as attendance, engagement with the company activities in recent times, HR analytics is used to predict if and when an employee is likely to leave. This helps the company act in advance (e.g. offering the employee incentives, to retain her).


Public Data

Previously, we talked about various private data sources. Now, let’s learn how to source public data sets. Public data is available on the internet on various platforms. A lot of data sets are available for direct analysis, whereas some of the data have to be manually extracted and converted into a format that is fit for analysis.


Let us now see how to source various types of public data from the internet.

Data Sourcing Anecdote - Agricultural Commodity Prices

 

Anand was presented a case by his client where he was tasked with forecasting commodity prices. Commodity prices, as the name suggests, are the prices of commodities such as oil, gold, silver, wheat, cotton, coffee, etc. that are traded in global trade markets. While an increase in commodity prices is indicative of economic growth, a fall in the same is indicative of a slowdown.


Let us see how Anand sourced the requisite data for analysis.

Optional Exercise - Sourcing Sports Data

If you are interested in sports, Awesome Public Datasets ( https://github.com/awesomedata/awesome-public-datasets ) on GitHub contains a directory of sports data from tennis, cricket, football, basketball and other sports. For example, you can find the ball-by-ball data of all the IPL seasons (~600 matches). You may find it interesting to browse through it and do some EDA/modeling as a side project and add it to your resume. A project on IPL could serve as an interesting talking point in any job interview!
 
 
 EDA

Think about an industry that you would love to analyse. How would you go about finding public data sets for this industry?

Some examples of useful datasets we got from previous students are:

    Daily oil and steel prices data (India) can be useful for someone working in the oil / transport / manufacturing industry

    Daily prices of air ticket prices for people working in air travel / tourism industry

    Daily price (conversion rate) of USD in units of INR per USD

 

Now, for this data set, what are some challenges that you would face while trying to convert the data set into formats that you could analyse (e.g. you would need to scrape the website, the data could be unstructured and ill-formatted, etc.)? Think about how you'd solve these problems and write your answer in the text box below.

1. Availability of entire dataset is not possible in many scenarios
2. Data format 
3. Veracity of data 
