So far, you have worked with numerical variables. But many times, you will have non-numeric variables in the datasets. These variables are also known as categorical variables. Obviously, these variables can't be used directly in the model since they are non-numeric.

When you have a categorical variable with say 'n' levels, the idea of dummy variable creation is to build 'n-1' variables, indicating the levels. For a variable say, 'Relationship' with three levels namely, 'Single', 'In a relationship', and 'Married', you would create a dummy table like the following:

 
Relationship Status	Single	In a relationship	Married
Single	1	0	0
In a relationship	0	1	0
Married	0	0	1

 

But you can clearly see that there is no need of defining three different levels. If you drop a level, say 'Single', you would still be able to explain the three levels.

 

Let's drop the dummy variable 'Single' from the columns and see what the table looks like:
 
Relationship Status	In a relationship	Married
Single	0	0
In a relationship	1	0
Married	0	1

 

If both the dummy variables namely 'In a relationship' and 'Married' are equal to zero, that means that the person is single. If 'In a relationship' is one and 'Married' is zero, that means that the person is in a relationship and finally, if 'In a relationship' is zero and 'Married' is 1, that means that the person is married.

 Questions:1/1
 
Number of Dummy Variables

The creation of dummy variables to convert a categorical variable into a numeric variable is an important step in data preparation. Consider a case where a categorical variable is a factor with 22 levels. How many dummy variables will be required to represent this categorical variable while developing the linear regression model?

20

21
Feedback :

N-1 dummy variables can be used to describe a categorical variable with N levels.
Correct

22

23

Before you move on to the next segment, there’s one concept that needs to be addressed, the concept of scaling the variables. Rahim had addressed scaling when answering a few common doubts surrounding linear regression in this optional segment, but now that you have dummy variables in the picture as well, let’s revisit the different aspects of scaling. 

https://learn.upgrad.com/v/course/208/session/25297/segment/126220

It is important to note that scaling just affects the coefficients and none of the other parameters like t-statistic, F-statistic, p-values, R-squared, etc.

 

There are two major methods to scale the variables, i.e. standardisation and MinMax scaling. Standardisation basically brings all of the data into a standard normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation one. MinMax scaling, on the other hand, brings all of the data in the range of 0 and 1. The formulae in the background used for each of these methods are as given below: 

    Standardisation:  x=x−mean(x)sd(x)
    MinMax Scaling: x=x−min(x)max(x)−min(x)

 
Coming up

In the next segment, you will learn to assess and compare models.

 

Additional Reading

    To know more about dummy variables (here) -https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/other/mult-pkg/faq/general/faqwhat-is-dummy-coding/
    Why it's necessary to create dummy variables (here)- https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/89533/convert-a-categorical-variable-to-a-numerical-variable-prior-to-regression
    When to Normalise date and when to standardise? (here)-https://stackoverflow.com/questions/32108179/linear-regression-normalization-vs-standardization
    Various scaling techniques (here) -https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feature_scaling

