Assumptions of Simple Linear Regression

Before moving to the Python code, there is an important aspect of linear regression that needs to be addressed, i.e. the assumptions of linear regression.

 

While building a linear model, you assume that the target variable and the input variables are linearly dependent. But do you need any assumptions other than this?


Let’s hear what Rahim has to say.

You are making inferences on the 'population' using a 'sample'. The assumption that variables are linearly dependent is not enough to generalise the results you obtain on a sample to the population, which is much larger in size than the sample. Thus, you need to have certain assumptions in place in order to make inferences.

 

Let's understand the importance of each assumption one by one:

 

There is a linear relationship between X and Y

    X and Y should display some sort of a linear relationship, otherwise, there is no use of fitting a linear model between them.

 Error terms are normally distributed with mean zero(not X, Y)

    There is no problem if the error terms are not normally distributed if you just wish to fit a line and not make any further interpretations.
    But if you're willing to make some inferences on the model you've built (you'll see this in further segments), you need to have a notion of distribution of the error terms. One particular repercussion of the error terms not being normally distributed is that the p-values obtained during the hypothesis test to determine the significance of the coefficients become unreliable (you'll see this in a later segment.).
    The assumption of normality is taken since it has been observed that the error terms generally follow a normal distribution with mean equal to zero in most of the cases.



Error terms are independent of each other

    The error terms should not be dependent on one another (like in a time-series data wherein the next value is dependent on the previous one).

 

Error terms have constant variance (homoscedasticity)

    The variance shouldn't increase (or decrease) as the error values change.
    Also, the variance shouldn't follow any pattern as the error terms change.

 

You'll look at each of these assumptions in more detail later and you'll also validate these while building the model.

 

You can also go through the following link to see what happens when the assumptions are violated. But things will anyway get clearer once we keep moving ahead.
keyboard_arrow_leftkeyboard_arrow_right

Questions:1/3
 
 
 
Assumptions of Simple Linear Regression

What will be the effect of the error terms not being homoscedastic in nature?

You will not be able to fit a straight line through the data.

The error terms will not be normally distributed.
 

The inferences made on the model would be unreliable.
Feedback :

Yes! Even if you fit a line through the data, you cannot make inferences on the model. The parameters used to make inferences (which you will study in later segments) will become highly unreliable.



Questions:2/3
 
 
 
Assumptions of Simple Linear Regression

Which of the assumptions of linear regression is the following image shown to be violating?

 

Linear relationship between X and y.

Error terms independent of each other.

Error terms normally distributed.

Error terms have constant variance.
Feedback :

Correct! As is evident from the graph, the error terms seem to be reducing as the value of X increases. This is clearly a violation of the assumption that the error terms have constant variance.

 Questions:3/3
 
 
 
Assumptions of Simple Linear Regression

You saw the following image in the lecture. What all assumptions on the error terms is this image referring to?

 

The error terms are normally distributed.

The mean in the distribution of the error terms is zero.

The error terms have constant variance.

All of the above.
Feedback :

Correct!

From the image, it is evident that the error terms are normally distributed.

Also, if you look at the image carefully, you'll see that the two bell curves which are shown actually have the mean zero. 



Image sources:

    Assumptions of Simple Linear Regression- http://reliawiki.org/index.php/Simple_Linear_Regression_Analysis
