Welcome TO the Program

Let's Know You Better

Before you get started, we would love to know you better. Please take a few minutes to fill the survey below and tell us a little about yourself. Please note that filling this survey is mandatory and is a prerequisite for receiving the final diploma. If you have already filled this, please proceed with the program. If the survey below does not load, you can paste this link directly into your browser - https://upgrad1.typeform.com/to/CR56Ak

Introduction and Syllabus

Welcome to the IIIT-B and UpGrad PGDDS program and congratulations on starting your journey! The aim of this program is to equip you with the necessary theoretical understanding and industry experience you need to build and grow your career in the field of data science.

 

Through discussions with business leaders, we have identified the important areas where data professionals need to excel in order to accelerate their career in data science. We will cover these areas under the following seven courses:

 

Course
	

Duration

Introduction to Data Management
	

~5 weeks

Statistics and Exploratory Data Analytics
	

~7 weeks

Predictive Analytics  I
	

~8 weeks

Predictive Analytics II
	

~8 weeks

Introduction to Big Data Analytics
	

~5 weeks

Domain Elective
	

~4 weeks

Capstone Project
	

~6 weeks

 

Each of these courses will have a buffer week in between, in which no new content will be released. Take this opportunity to revise and reflect on the course you just completed.

 

In this module, you will get to know about the progression of the course and how it will be taught. Here, we will provide a brief overview of the syllabus that will be covered in the entire course. Secondly, we will explain to you the learning experience in the Data Science program as well as the Technology Platform that will help you learn. Thirdly, we will talk about the student success services that UpGrad has established to help you be successful in the program. Here, you will also get to know your how the Student mentors and Teaching Assistants will guide you through the next weeks. Lastly, we will discuss the evaluation process that will be followed in the program.

 

To give you a brief overview of the course, this is a rigorous PG Diploma program which has multiple courses built into it. In the preparatory content, we have provided you with the basics of important tools, such as Python, SQL and Tableau, which will be used thoroughly in the program. You need to get comfortable with this content to have a smooth journey along the course. Otherwise, it will be quite difficult to cope up with the future segments.

 

To build on the tools learnt in the preparatory content, the first course in the program dives into some advanced options available to a user. You will be provided with relevant business examples and cases where you can apply your learning.

 

The second course is an intermediate course on Statistics and Exploratory Data Analytics, where you will learn topics like descriptive statistics, inferential statistics and hypothesis testing. This course lays down the foundation for the subsequent courses in predictive analytics.

 

In the next two courses, you will learn about the magical world of predictive analytics and will be introduced to various machine learning algorithms. The aim of these two courses is mainly to give you executional knowledge of ML. However, you would also gain a mathematical understanding of many algorithms.

 

The next course is an introductory course on Big Data. The purpose is to provide you with a foundational knowledge of tools like Hadoop, HDFS, Spark etc. that you might use as data scientists or analysts.

 

Finally, the program’s focus will shift to domain specialisation and a capstone project where you will understand the nuances of analytics in the domain of your choice.

 

All the courses are interspersed with hands-on assignments and industry case studies to help you contextualize your learning. Throughout the courses, leading academicians will take you through the theoretical understanding of the topics mentioned above, and industry leaders will talk about their applications in business cases. This parallel perspective will equip you with the perfect combination of academic rigour and industry relevance.

 

Next Mayank, the Co-founder at UpGrad will talk about the learning experience and the student success initiatives associated with the program.


Learning Experience

At UpGrad, we have worked with India's leading academicians, experts and technology professionals to create the most engaging learning environment for you. 

 

Let us hear from Mayank Kumar, CEO and Co-Founder at UpGrad, as he describes the platform and your learning experience for the upcoming weeks and months.

So, to summarise, you should remember the following:

    The program is split into multiple courses, each focusing on key areas in the field of data analytics and a domain elective that finally ends with a capstone project.

    Each course is split into modules which are further split into multiple sessions dealing with a specific topic.

    Each course also contains a case study and/ or assignment(s) so that you can apply the concepts to a business problem.

    Each session and case study is divided into different pages, each with a different learning objective.

    Each page is a combination of text, video, application questions and assignments that you should go through from top to bottom. You need to complete all the components on a page before moving forward. Assignments and Case studies, being longer, can be skipped but remember to submit them before the deadline.
    
    Reporting Mistakes at UpGrad Platform
Reporting a mistake

If you find any mistakes in the content provided on the platform or if you face any technical issue while going through the content, then you should use the ‘Report a mistake’ button which is provided at the bottom of every segment on the platform. Our team shall get back to you with a clarification or an appropriate fix

When should you ‘Report a Mistake’?

The purpose of this segment is to explain when to report mistakes and how to choose between posting a query on Discussion Forum or ‘Reporting a mistake’.

 

Firstly, how to choose between posting a question on the Discussion forum Vs. ‘Report a mistake’

 

If you find any mistakes in the content provided on the platform, then you should use the ‘Report a mistake’ button. In case you have any doubts or require clarification about the content provided on the platform, then you should go for posting a question on the Discussion Forum. Discussion Forum should be utilized for peer interactions where you should post any
genuine doubts/discussion points related to the content.

 

If you are not able to understand the content provided on the platform for any reason, and you are not sure that there is a mistake, then post it on the Discussion Forum to get clarification from other students and our teaching assistants.

 

Things to keep in mind before ‘Report a mistake’:-

    In some of the modules, an FAQ list is present in almost all the segments where we have answered the frequent questions that we have encountered in the past. Make sure that you check this list of FAQs before you go on to report a mistake.

    Some of these FAQs are segment-specific and some of these are common FAQs that students generally have regarding the platform, code submissions, etc. The common FAQs are present in the first two segments of the first session of the modules. We recommend you go through these even if you haven't faced that issue in that particular segment as you might face it in the future. 

    Choose an appropriate category for the mistake. For example, “Mistake in text” or “Mistake in video” etc. whichever is most suitable.

Mistake in Text/Video

    If a page consist of more than one video, select the video number from the drop down and also mention the approximate timestamps at which you found the mistake.

Mistake in Video

 

    If a page consists of many quiz questions, select the appropriate quiz number from the drop down.

Mistake in Quiz

    If a quiz consists of multiple questions, mention the appropriate question number

    For programming questions, try solving it using the integrated development environment (IDE) before reporting a mistake. If you try answering the programming questions by thinking it through, the answer you arrive at may not be correct and you end up reporting an issue which is not correct.

    If you have any issues with the grading of your assignment, case study etc. don't report it as a mistake. For these type of issues please contact your student mentor.

    In case you face any technical issue, refer to http://help.upgrad.com for immediate fixes. You can also reach the UpGrad help centre by clicking on the ‘?” button at the top right corner of your screen.

Technical Issues
arrow_drop_downarrow_drop_upQuiz Summary

    Question 1
    keyboard_arrow_right
    Correct
    Question 2
    keyboard_arrow_right
    Submitted
    Question 3
    keyboard_arrow_right
    Submitted

Things to keep in mind before posting a question on the ‘Discussion Forum’:-

    Give an appropriate heading to the question.

    Write a clear and short explanation of the question asked.

    For coding questions, especially on Python, follow these guidelines:

        Don't ask direct answers to the questions on the platform.

        Share what you have done so far, code snippet and what error or understanding issue you are facing.

    Choose an appropriate topic for the question.

    Be very cautious while raising a question related to a project/graded assessment. Never ask for the answer/hints for arriving at the answer. These questions shall be immediately taken down and you shall be penalized for the same

    If you refer to any online source while answering a question, always mention the source. The answer if deemed plagiarised will be taken down from the platform and shall attract a penalty.

    While answering the question especially for coding questions:

        Don’t give direct answers. Use pseudocode to explain the concept to the student who asked the question.

        Don’t copy paste links directly from google search. First, explain the concept in your own words and then an additional reference, post the link as a side note.

 
arrow_drop_downarrow_drop_upQuiz Summary

    Question 1
    keyboard_arrow_right
    Incorrect
    Question 2
    keyboard_arrow_right
    Correct

 

Reporting a mistake when you actually need a question answered, will lead to an increase in the time taken to resolve your questions.

 

To summarise, click the “Report a Mistake” button only if you find something incorrect in the content on the platform or if you are facing any technical issue that is hampering your course progress. If you are not able to understand a concept taught on the platform, post it as a question on the Discussion Forum.

Peer Interaction

As part of this program, you have an extremely diverse peer group of analytics enthusiasts and professionals who are going to accompany you through this journey and beyond. Let us understand how you can interact with them, receive their support and reciprocate.

Current Time 0:48
/
Duration 2:29
 
Playback Rate
Auto
1.5x

As Mayank mentioned, social interaction is a crucial component of the UpGrad learning experience. We request you to update your public profile as soon as possible so that your peers can get to know you and vice-versa. It is up to you to keep the discussion forum productive and useful for everyone. The TAs will be monitoring the forum, responding to queries and verifying other students’ answers. You are encouraged to answer your fellow students' questions and also upvote questions/responses that you find valuable. Your upvoted posts and the ones verified by the TAs on the discussion forum will earn you points and will count towards a small portion of your grades (more on that later!). You can find the forum questions on each topic in the right sidebar of each content page, or going directly to the discussion forum.

 

All official communication will be through email and on the platform. In case you find an email from IIIT-B or UpGrad in your spam or promotion inbox, move it to your primary inbox to avoid missing future emails. Conversations on social groups such as Whatsapp or facebook are for your interaction and they will not be monitored by IIIT-B or UpGrad, so do not post official program queries there as they may get missed.

 

It is mandatory to follow the community guidelines attached below while participating in the discussion forum on UpGrad’s platform..
