Checkpoints - Part 2
Checkpoint 3: Country Analysis

This is the second goal of analysis — country analysis.

 

Now that you know the type of investment suited for Spark Funds, let's narrow down the countries.

 

Spark Funds wants to invest in countries with the highest amount of funding for the chosen investment type. This is a part of its broader strategy to invest where most investments are occurring.

 

    Spark Funds wants to see the top nine countries which have received the highest total funding (across ALL sectors for the chosen investment type)

    For the chosen investment type, make a data frame named top9 with the top nine countries (based on the total investment amount each country has received)

 

Identify the top three English-speaking countries in the data frame top9.

 

Results Expected: All codes for data frame top9. Fill out Table 3.1.

 

Table 3.1: Analysing the Top 3 English-Speaking Countries
 1. Top English-speaking country	              
 2. Second English-speaking country	 
 3. Third English-speaking country	 

 

Now you also know the three most investment-friendly countries and the most suited funding type for Spark Funds. Let us now focus on finding the best sectors in these countries.

 
Checkpoint 4: Sector Analysis 1

This is the third goal of analysis — sector analysis.

 

When we say sector analysis, we refer to one of the eight main sectors (named main_sector) listed in the mapping file (note that ‘Other’ is one of the eight main sectors). This is to simplify the analysis by grouping the numerous category lists (named ‘category_list’) in the mapping file. For example, in the mapping file, category_lists such as ‘3D’, ‘3D Printing’, ‘3D Technology’, etc. are mapped to the main sector ‘Manufacturing’.

 

Also, for some companies, the category list is a list of multiple sub-sectors separated by a pipe (vertical bar |). For example, one of the companies’ category_list is Application Platforms|Real Time|Social Network Media.

 

You discuss with the CEO and come up with the business rule that the first string before the vertical bar will be considered the primary sector. In the example above, ‘Application Platforms’ will be considered the primary sector.

    Extract the primary sector of each category list from the category_list column

    Use the mapping file 'mapping.csv' to map each primary sector to one of the eight main sectors (Note that ‘Others’ is also considered one of the main sectors)

Expected Results: Code for a merged data frame with each primary sector mapped to its main sector (the primary sector should be present in a separate column).

 
Checkpoint 5: Sector Analysis 2

Now you have a data frame with each company’s main sector (main_sector) mapped to it. When we say sector analysis, we refer to one of the eight main sectors.

 

Also, you know the top three English speaking countries and the most suitable funding type for Spark Funds. Let’s call the three countries 'Country 1', 'Country 2' and 'Country 3' and the funding type 'FT'.

 

Also, the range of funding preferred by Spark Funds is 5 to 15 million USD.

 

Now, the aim is to find out the most heavily invested main sectors in each of the three countries (for funding type FT and investments range of 5-15 M USD).

    Create three separate data frames D1, D2 and D3 for each of the three countries containing the observations of funding type FT falling within the 5-15 million USD range. The three data frames should contain:

    All the columns of the master_frame along with the primary sector and the main sector

    The total number (or count) of investments for each main sector in a separate column

    The total amount invested in each main sector in a separate column

Using the three data frames, you can calculate the total number and amount of investments in each main sector.

 

Result Expected 

    Three data frames D1, D2 and D3 

    Table 5.1: Based on the analysis of the sectors, which main sectors and countries would you recommend Spark Funds to invest in? Present your conclusions in the presentation. The conclusions are subjective (i.e. there may be no ‘one right answer’), but it should be based on the basic strategy — invest in sectors where most investments are occurring. 

 

Note: In the following table, all the observations refer to investments of the type FT within 5-15 M USD range. 

 

Table 5.1 : Sector-wise Investment Analysis

   
	

Country 1
	

Country 2
	

Country 3

 1. Total number of investments (count)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 2. Total amount of investment (USD)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 3. Top sector (based on count of investments)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 4. Second-best sector (based on count of investments)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 5. Third-best sector (based on count of investments)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 6. Number of investments in the top sector (refer to point 3)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 7. Number of investments in the second-best sector (refer to point 4)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 8. Number of investments in the third-best sector (refer to point 5)
	

 
	

 
	

 

 9. For the top sector count-wise (point 3), which company received the highest investment?
	

 
	

 
	

 

 10. For the second-best sector count-wise (point 4), which company received the highest investment?
	

 
	

 
	

 

 
Checkpoint 6: Plots

As a final step, you have to present your findings to the CEO of Spark Funds. Specifically, she wants to see the following plots:

    A plot showing the fraction of total investments (globally) in venture, seed, and private equity, and the average amount of investment in each funding type. This chart should make it clear that a certain funding type (FT) is best suited for Spark Funds.

    A plot showing the top 9 countries against the total amount of investments of funding type FT. This should make the top 3 countries (Country 1, Country 2, and Country 3) very clear.

    A plot showing the number of investments in the top 3 sectors of the top 3 countries on one chart (for the chosen investment type FT). 

 

This plot should clearly display the top 3 sectors each in Country 1, Country 2, and Country 3.

 

Expected Result: The three plots in Tableau.
