Checkpoints - Part 1
Checkpoint 1: Data Cleaning 1

    Load the companies and rounds data (provided on the previous page) into two data frames and name them companies and rounds2 respectively.
    Table 1.1: The table below is just for reference — you need to fill out the spreadsheet which is attached in the download section. This holds true for all the tables.

 

Results Expected: Table 1.1

 Table 1.1: Understand the Data Set 
How many unique companies are present in rounds2?	

 
How many unique companies are present in companies?	                       
In the companies data frame, which column can be used as the unique key for each company? Write the name of the column.	 
Are there any companies in the rounds2 file which are not present in companies? Answer yes or no: Y/N	 

Merge the two data frames so that all variables (columns) in the companies frame are added to the rounds2 data frame. Name the merged frame master_frame. How many observations are present in master_frame?
	 

 

After this, you will need to work only with the master frame.

 

Note: When you load the dataset, you might notice that in the ‘permalink’ column of the ‘Company’ dataframe and in the ‘company_permalink’ column of the ‘rounds2’ dataframe, there are some encoding issues. We have attached a screenshot below:
Encoding issue in some rows

 

It is extremely essential that you handle this encoding issue as simply deleting this cell might cause you to lose important data which in turn will affect your whole analysis. For this, you need to specify a different coding type for the ‘company_permalink’ column. Here’s a list of various encoding types that Python can handle:

    Standard Encodings

 

The best conclusion that can be drawn is that this file is encoded using multiple encoding types (maybe because the ‘company_permalink’ column contains names of companies in various countries, and hence various languages).

We have provided a StackOverflow answer below which might serve as an intelligent way to tackle this problem: 

    Removing Special Characters in a Pandas DataFrame - StackOverflow

 
Checkpoint 2: Funding Type Analysis

This is the first of the three goals of data analysis – investment type analysis.

 

The funding types such as seed, venture, angel, etc. depend on the type of the company (startup, corporate, etc.), its stage (early stage startup, funded startup, etc.), the amount of funding (a few million USD to a billion USD), and so on. For example, seed, angel and venture are three common stages of startup funding.

    Seed/angel funding refers to early-stage startups whereas venture funding occurs after seed or angel stage/s and involves a relatively higher amount of investment.
    Private equity type investments are associated with much larger companies and involve much higher investments than venture type. Startups which have grown in scale may also receive private equity funding. This means that if a company has reached the venture stage, it would have already passed through the angel or seed stage/s.

 

Spark Funds wants to choose one of these four investment types for each potential investment they will make.

 

Considering the constraints of Spark Funds, you have to decide one funding type which is most suitable for them.

    Calculate the average investment amount for each of the four funding types (venture, angel, seed, and private equity) and report the answers in Table 2.1

    Based on the average investment amount calculated above, which investment type do you think is the most suitable for Spark Funds?

 

Results Expected: Table 2.1

 

Table 2.1: Average Values of Investments for Each of these Funding Types 
 Average funding amount of venture type	                              
 Average funding amount of angel type	 
 Average funding amount of seed type	 
 Average funding amount of private equity type	 

Considering that Spark Funds wants to invest between 5 to 15 million USD per investment round, which investment type is the most suitable for it?
	                                                                                       

 

Great! You have crossed two checkpoints. There are four checkpoints left now.
