Grading

Your road to success will be long and hard, but a fulfilling one. Along your way, you will have to showcase and prove your skills to many stakeholders, including faculty members, peers, mentors, and the outside world.

 

In the program, your performance will be evaluated through quiz questions, individual submissions, group assessments, exams, and peer interactions as these formats replicate the actual academic as well as the work environment that you would experience in the outside world.

Over the course of the program, you will be engaging in the following activities that go into the calculation of your Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) at the end of the program:

    Graded Questions: You are individually evaluated on the basis of your learning in the sessions and modules. These graded questions are in the form of Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs). You will be receiving automatic feedback on these MCQs as soon as you attempt them. Graded questions will always be marked out separately at the end of sessions. Please note that questions within videos and session content are not graded, and are just to reinforce the concepts that you are learning. Graded questions will appear only towards the end of the session/module and will be explicitly marked as graded.

    Assignments:  You are individually evaluated on the basis of your submissions (e.g. codes). Also, along with scores, individual qualitative feedback will be provided on your submissions. The assignments will be graded against a set of assessment criterion also known as rubrics given along with the assignment. So make sure to refer to the assessment criterion before and during attempting your assignments.

    Group Case Studies: You will apply your learning as a group of data analysts to industry-relevant problems. Along with scores, individual qualitative feedback will be provided on your submissions. Similar to assignments, case studies will be graded against a set of assessment criterion.

    Online Exams: Online proctored exams will assess your conceptual clarity on all that you have learnt. We have planned one exam after Course 2 (for course 1 and 2), one after Course 3 and one after course 5 (for course 4 and 5). You will have a total of these 3 exams during the PGDDS program. The dates of these exams will be released and updated on the calendar. You will have a choice to choose between one of the two exam slots.

    Class Participation: Class Participation is measured by how well you build your student profile, interact with your peers, and provide answers to queries raised on discussion forums. You will be evaluated in this category based on your verified answers on the discussion forum and upvoted posts. Posting questions or answers alone is not going to accumulate any points for you. We encourage you to participate actively with your peers on the discussion forum – not only to solve your queries but also to network with your peers. Posting irrelevant responses or spamming on the forum will incur a penalty. Any external channel such as Facebook/ Whatsapp or any other social group will not be considered part of this score.

    The Capstone Project: It is the flagship hands-on project where you will work on a project developed with our industry partners. This would require you to understand the business problem and, accordingly, use and evaluate various analytical techniques to solve the problem. The project will go a long way in building your CV and providing you with hands-on experience on an industry-mentored analytics project. Faculty and industry mentors will guide you on your project approach and provide grades and quality feedback on your project performance.

We expect every student to attempt each of these graded elements with the highest academic integrity. Any incidents of plagiarism or cheating will be treated very severely by the academic committee of IIIT-B.

 

Program Assessment and Grading Structure

Your Grade Point Average (GPA) will be computed for every course/capstone project based on a series of assessments. The combination of assessments slightly varies by course. For the first 5 courses, the weightage of the assessments is as stated below:

 

 Type of Assessments
	

Weightage

Graded Questions (MCQs)
	

20%

Assignments
	

30%

Group case studies
	

15%

Online exam
	

25%

Class participation

(through Discussion Forum)
	

10%

 

For the sixth course, the weightage of the assessments is as stated below:

 

Type of Assessments
	

Weightage

Graded MCQs (end of session/module)
	

20%

Individual assignment
	

70%

Class participation

(through Discussion Forum)
	

10%


 

For the capstone project, you will be assessed in the following manner:

 

Final Project
	

Type of Assessments
	

Weightage in Project

Group capstone project
	

Project performance
	

90%

Class participation

(through Discussion Forum)
	

10%

 

As you receive a GPA for each course and capstone project, you will build your cumulative grade point average (CGPA). Here is how the CGPA for the program is computed:

 

Each of the six courses counts for 4 credits each, and the capstone project counts for 12 credits, adding up to a total of 36 credits. The GPA scores you receive for each course and the capstone project, weighted by its respective proportion of credits, add up to the CGPA for the entire program.

 

For instance, if the grade points awarded to a student are G1, G2, etc. in courses with corresponding credits U1, U2, etc., the CGPA = (U1G1 + U2G2 + ....) / (U1 + U2 +…), wherein U1, U2 refer to all courses taken up to the time of computation.

 

You will be evaluated on a 4 point scale and the passing grade for a course is D (1 on a 4 point scale). However, to get the PG Diploma, your Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) should be at least 2.4. You have to make sure that you meet these criteria throughout the course of the program. Also, you need to score at least 20% in each of the assessment elements (graded MCQs,  assignments, case studies, final exams, etc.) to pass a particular course. If you get a grade below D in any course, then the academic committee of PGDDS will decide on the next steps.

 

For more details on grading and GPA calculation, refer to “Student Assessment and learning experience manual”

 

Assessment Timelines

You will be notified about the assessment timelines well in advance to help you plan your submissions well within deadlines.

 

The student calendar will be the central point where you can view all timelines related to assessments and live sessions in one place. The release dates and submission deadlines for all assessments will be stated on your calendar. We consider every Monday to be the start of the week and Sunday to be the end of the week.  The calendar for each course will be updated at the beginning of the course itself so that you can plan your learning experience for that course.

 

The submission deadlines are non-negotiable. You will have sufficient notice to prepare for your assignments and submit them before the deadlines. If you submit the assignments or case studies after the deadline or attempt graded MCQs after the deadline, but before one week after the deadline, you will be graded on 70% of the original marks (you will incur a 30% penalty).

 

If you delay your assignments or graded MCQs beyond a week after the original deadline, you will be given a zero in the assignment/graded MCQ, however, feedback will be provided on your assignment submission. For e.g. if the deadline was 2nd August 2018, 11:59:00 PM, then all submission made from 2nd August, 2018, 11:59:01 PM to 9th August, 2018, 11:59:00 PM will attract a penalty of 30% (which means that if your score after grading the assignment was let’s say 100/150, then your score after penalty will be 70/150). Submissions from 9th August 2018, 11:59:01 PM will attract a penalty of 100% i.e. will be given zero marks.

 

Note: As mentioned above, all the graded MCQs also need to be attempted within the module deadline to avoid any penalties.

 

Group Formation and Class Participation

You would be expected to form your own group for the group case study assignment. Any group that you form needs to meet the following criteria:

    Each group should consist of  4 students for case study assignments

    You will be allowed to select new groups from time to time so that you interact with more of your peers. You may choose to remain in the same group.

Class participation for every course will be scored based on the following:

    Completion of your student profile on the platform

    Your ongoing discussion forum score

Our TAs will constantly be monitoring the discussion forum activity to ensure fair participation by all.

 

Please download and go through the Student Assessment & Learning Experience Manual to know about assessments in more details:

 
Student Assessment & Learning Experience Manual
file_downloadDownload

 

Also, please go through the Code of Conduct that you will be expected to abide by during the course of this program
