Planning Your Learning Experience

Since this is a rigorous Diploma program, you will have to go the extra mile to get a good grasp of all the concepts and their applications. So it is extremely important that you plan your study week properly. The learning experience consists of two broad elements — asynchronous activities which can be performed at your own convenience within the deadlines, and synchronous activities like live lectures which take place at a set time and day. Let’s watch the video to understand how you can plan these activities in a week.

Plan for 8 - 10 hours per week.
Daily Learning
Cover Pre-requisites Materials
Stick to the deadlines
Make notes
Solve Assignment/Case Study
Peer Discussions

So the key takeaways are as follows:

    Make sure to commit at least 8-10 hours per week to the program and follow a planned schedule. This commitment might vary for you depending on your pace of learning. We will also be there to help you plan your activities and achieve all the set targets. How? We’ll cover this in the next lecture.
    Data Analytics is a vast field and in the next 11 months, we will be able to only scratch the surface of some of the topics. Use the PGDDS learning experience to build a solid foundation in the field of data analytics, but also explore the resources outside the platform to complement what you learn in this program, e.g. participating in hackathons, doing Kaggle challenges etc.
    
    Student Success Initiatives

Here at UpGrad and IIIT-B, we have designed a strong system for you to help you achieve your goals for the program.


Let's hear from Mayank about the different avenues you can use to reach out to us for any challenges that you face during the program.

So, to summarise, remember the following:

 

General Queries and Help with Challenges

Every student has a dedicated Student Mentor who will help you in any non-academic program-related challenges, and help you in achieving your goals. You can explore the common queries or reach out to your mentor using the Support tab from the platform.

 

For general topics that you would like to discuss with your fellow students, the WhatsApp group is the most suitable medium. UpGrad and IIIT-B will create the groups but will not be monitoring the interactions that occur within them.

 

Academic Queries

The discussion forum is the best place to post your academic queries. These questions can then be answered by your fellow students. Our teaching assistants will evaluate these responses and will verify appropriate responses or provide additional ones.

 

One important thing to note is that the teaching assistants will not step in and answer any queries for the first 24 hours. If no acceptable response has been provided to your question by peers on the forum, only then will the TAs step in and provide a suitable answer within 24-48 hours. Additionally, TAs will also be verifying the most relevant answers to the questions within the 48 hours period.


Career Support Initiatives

Throughout this program, keep in mind the reason you took this up in the first place — you want to grow and advance in your career. We are here to give you the know-how, the skills and the application, but only you can take this forward. So, a lot of push and commitment will be required from your side, but it is this effort that will pay off in the long run. All the extra work you put in during the program will help you build a successful career in data science.

UpGrad and IIITB will connect you to suitable career opportunities if you opt in for career support. But we can only provide the relevant opportunities —we will support you in converting them but it will require a lot of hard work from your side because you will be competing with qualified applicants from within the program and outside. 

 

Once you opt in for career support, you will be expected to meet certain eligibility criteria such as:

    Submitting your résumé and updating your LinkedIn account within the stipulated deadline.

    Filling out the surveys to provide career-related information and interests

    Going through the PG Diploma and passing all the courses. The higher your GPA, the better are your chances of being shortlisted for opportunities.

    Completion of the career module (to be released later) within the deadline.

We will be releasing a separate module later in the program which will help you prepare for these opportunities and will give you all the relevant details. Additionally, later in the program you will get the opportunity to opt. in for the career services. For, now let us focus back on learning!

