Assignment- Linear Regression
Problem Statement

This assignment is a programming assignment wherein you have to build a multiple linear regression model for the prediction of car prices. You will need to submit a Jupyter notebook for the same. 

 
Problem Statement

A Chinese automobile company Geely Auto aspires to enter the US market by setting up their manufacturing unit there and producing cars locally to give competition to their US and European counterparts. 

 

They have contracted an automobile consulting company to understand the factors on which the pricing of cars depends. Specifically, they want to understand the factors affecting the pricing of cars in the American market, since those may be very different from the Chinese market. The company wants to know:

    Which variables are significant in predicting the price of a car
    How well those variables describe the price of a car

Based on various market surveys, the consulting firm has gathered a large dataset of different types of cars across the Americal market. 

 

Business Goal 

You are required to model the price of cars with the available independent variables. It will be used by the management to understand how exactly the prices vary with the independent variables. They can accordingly manipulate the design of the cars, the business strategy etc. to meet certain price levels. Further, the model will be a good way for management to understand the pricing dynamics of a new market. 

 

Data Preparation

    There is a variable named CarName which is comprised of two parts - the first word is the name of 'car company' and the second is the 'car model'. For example, chevrolet impala has 'chevrolet' as the car company name and 'impala' as the car model name. You need to consider only company name as the independent variable for model building. 

 

Model Evaluation:

    When you're done with model building and residual analysis, and have made predictions on the test set, just make sure you use the following two lines of code to calculate the R-squared score on the test set.
     

    from sklearn.metrics import r2_score
    r2_score(y_test, y_pred)

        where y_test is the test data set for the target variable, and y_pred is the variable containing the predicted values of the target variable on the test set.


    Please don't forget to perform this step as the R-squared score on the test set holds some marks. The variable names inside the 'r2_score' function can be different based on the variable names you have chosen.

 

Downloads:

You can download the dataset file from the link given below:

Assignment - Dataset
file_downloadDownload
Assignment - Data Dictionary
file_downloadDownload


Evaluation Rubric
Rubrics

Criteria
	

Meets expectations
	

Does not meet expectations

Data understanding, preparation and EDA (35%)
	

All data quality checks are performed, and all data quality issues are addressed in the right way (missing value imputation, removing duplicate data and other kinds of data redundancies, etc.). Explanations for data quality issues are clearly mentioned in comments.

 

Categorical variables are handled appropriately.

 

 

 

Dummy variables are created properly wherever applicable.
 

 

 

New metrics are derived if applicable and are used for analysis and modelling.
 

 

 

The data is converted to a clean format suitable for analysis.
	

 

 

All quality checks are not done, data quality issues are not addressed correctly to an appropriate level.

 

Categorical variables are not handled appropriately where required.

 

Dummy variables are not created properly.

 

 

New metrics are not derived or are not used for analysis.

 

The data is not converted to a clean format which is suitable for analysis or is not cleaned using commands.

Model building and evaluation (60%)
	

 

Model parameters are tuned using correct principles and the approach is explained clearly. Both technical and business aspects are considered while building the model.

 

 

Correct variable selection techniques are used. A reasonable number of different models are attempted and the best one is chosen based on key performance metrics.

 

 

Model evaluation is done using the correct principles and appropriate evaluation metrics are chosen.

 

 

The results are on par with the best possible model on the dataset.

 

The model is interpreted and explained correctly. The commented code includes a brief explanation of the important variables and the model in simple terms.
	

Parameters are not tuned enough or tuned incorrectly. Relevant business aspects are not considered while model building.

 

Variable selection techniques are used incorrectly / not conducted. A variety of models are not considered or a sub-optimal one is finalised.

 

The evaluation process deviates from correct model selection principles, inappropriate metrics are evaluated or are incorrectly evaluated.

 

 

The results are not on par with the best possible model on the dataset.

 

The model is not interpreted and explained correctly.

 

Coding Guidelines (5%)

 
	

Appropriate comments are written wherever applicable.

 

 

 

If new variables are created, the names are descriptive and unambiguous.

 

 

The code is written concisely wherever possible.

 

 

 

Overall, code readability is good with appropriate indentations.
	

Comments are not written rendering the code difficult to understand.

 

 

Variables are poorly or ambiguously named.

 

 

The code is more complex than what is required by the problem.
 

Code readability is poor because of poor indentation / other reasons.



Final Submission

For submissions obtained within one week after the deadline, there will be a 30% penalty. Submissions beyond one week after the deadline will not be accepted.

  

Submissions required: A well-commented Jupyter notebook.

 

Please make sure that you are not changing any of the file names that have been provided for download. The code that you are submitting should run at our end on the same files without any modification of the code.
