Introduction

Welcome to the second session of Data Analysis in Excel. In this session, you will learn to use some powerful Excel techniques used to understand and manipulate data. The learning objectives of this session are:

    Use csv and delimited files to read data
    To understand common tricks in Data Analysis (e.g.: Bucketing & Segmenting)
    Use shortcuts while working in MS Excel
    Use formulae and Cell Referencing in MS Excel
    Create visualisations to analyse and present data / important insights 

 

This module assumes no pre-requisite knowledge of Excel and essentially builds on what you've learnt in session 1.

 
In this session:

In this session, you will take a bank's telemarketing business problem to understand the types of customers which should be targeted for future marketing campaigns. The dataset contains demographic and personal information of about 45000 people and their response to a telemarketing campaign, i.e. whether they bought a certain product when contacted by the company through telemarketing. 

 

Our objective is to find the attributes of customers who are likely to buy the product when contacted through telemarketing. This is a classic case of acquisition analytics where companies use past data to predict which customers are likely to buy certain products.   

 

The following topics will be covered in this session:

    Delimited files
    Discovering shortcuts
    Formulae in Excel
    Complex Functions
    Cell Referencing and Text Functions
    Logical Formulae
    Creating & Formatting Charts in Excel
    Choosing the right type of Chart

 
Guidelines for In-Module Questions:

The in-video and in-content questions and the assignments of this module are not graded. 

 

We suggest that you download the dataset from the end of this page and work alongside.

Downloads

You can download the bank-marketing dataset here.
bank-marketing.csv
file_downloadDownload

 Delimited Files

Delimited files are data files which have values separated by certain special characters (e.g.: Tab, Comma, Semi - Colon). They are in widespread use because they can be easily accessed by various platforms and spreadsheet software apart from Excel. Some of the most commonly used delimited file formats are:

 

    Comma Separated Values Files (CSV)
    Semi-Colon Separated File
    Tab Separated File

 

For example, the following fields in each record are separated by Semi-Colons, and each record by new lines:

 
Semi Colon Separated File Storage

 

The following image shows how the same file would look after exporting to MS Excel

 
Semi Colon Separated File - Extracted in Excel

 

In this segment, you will learn about extracting data (to MS Excel) from one type of Delimited Files - Semi Colon Separated Files. In the process, you will learn about some important functions like Text to Columns.

 

 

In the next segment, you will learn about exploring keyboard shortcuts in MS Excel. Using keyboard shortcuts will increase the speed of your analysis tremendously!

 

 
Introduction to Formulae
In the last segment, we developed an understanding of the telemarketing dataset -

A bank contacted approximately 45,000 people for a telemarketing campaign and recorded their opinion on purchasing a new product. In this session, you will analyse the dataset to find profiles of people who should be targeted i.e. categories of people who have a higher propensity to buy the new product.

 

Why is this important?

A focused targeting will not only increase the sales of the new product but also reduce the marketing cost.

This is a fairly common analysis and a lot of you would have faced similar questions at work:

Which customers to reach out for an e-mail marketing campaign?
Which customers to target based on their demographics?
All such analysis includes bucketing/segmenting. In this session, apart from Excel skills, we will also learn about developing the analytical skills like Bucketing & Segmenting.

Remember, formulae start with an equal sign '='. Recall that:

Cells are named as a combination of the respective rows and columns i.e. the cell at the intersection of Column A and Row 2 is named as A2.
Formulae can use cell references. Copy and Pasting formulae adjust the input cells references appropriately.
Double Click on the Autofill square at the bottom right of a cell to fill an entire range. Excel is smart enough to change the input references for each cell.
 

In the next  video, you will learn about Mathematical Formulae.

Complex Functions
Recall that our primary aim is to find the types of people who are most likely to respond positively to the campaign. You can analyse various attributes like age group, marital status etc. one at a time or could automate the task to do the same thing in a fraction of seconds. In this segment, you will learn faster ways to extract the important pieces of information from the data.

 n the previous video, we observed the use of:

0 & 1 instead of No & Yes. The use of binary values (especially 0 & 1)  makes the computation of average easier. 
Remove Duplicates in the Data Tab. Remove Duplicates can be used to find only the unique values in a column.
Is there a formula that can automate the aggregation by age group and eliminate the use of filters? Let's explore

To summarize the most important things you've learnt:

You calculated the average of the response column based on the marital  column using the AVERAGEIF function; it computes the average of the response column if the marital status is married / single / divorced
You learnt how to freeze certain cells in a formula using a dollar sign; in the AVERAGEIF formula, you wanted the marital status to change but not the range of response values
Freezing cells in formulae is one of the most important skills you'll need to do in everyday analysis, so make sure to practise a bit more of that in the upcoming segments. 

Cell Referencing and Text Functions
Until now, you have analyzed one variable at a time, i.e. age, marital status etc. In reality, it is possible that a combination of variables affects the propensity of a person to buy a product. For example, it is possible that married and tertiary educated  people do not buy many banking products, but unmarried and tertiary educated ones do. 

 

In this segment, you will analyze multiple variables at a time. In the process, you'll learn text functions and a few more techniques to combine variables. 


Cell Referencing and Text Functions
Until now, you have analyzed one variable at a time, i.e. age, marital status etc. In reality, it is possible that a combination of variables affects the propensity of a person to buy a product. For example, it is possible that married and tertiary educated  people do not buy many banking products, but unmarried and tertiary educated ones do. 

 

In this segment, you will analyze multiple variables at a time. In the process, you'll learn text functions and a few more techniques to combine variables. 

You can now create multiple new variables by combining two or more of the original ones, like marital-housing, gender-age group, loan-month etc. But that would create far too many new variables than you can possibly analyze and make sense out of, and so we should think of better ways to do it?

 

Excel provides the option of using PIVOT Tables which help perform such aggregation automatically. We will learn more about PIVOT Tables in the next session.
 
 
 Logical Formulae
Logical formulae are used to manipulate variables which can take only two values. For example, you may want to divide the data into two parts based on age - young (< 40 years) and old (>40 years). You can use logical formulae to do the same. The word 'logical' indicates either of two values, e.g. 1 or 0. 

 

The most commonly used logical functions are IF and OR, which you will learn in this segment.


Recall, so far, we've learnt about different kinds of formulae:

Mathematical
Statistical
Text
Logical
We've also learnt about Keyboard Shortcuts and some tricks in analysis (e.g.: Bucketing, Using Binary variables like 0 & 1, Use of Text to Columns and Remove Duplicates). Are you amazed at the speed at which Anand has performed this analysis? Have you observed the style of analysis i.e. Anand poses a business relevant question/hypotheses and uses the data to validate the hypotheses. 

 

Let's hear Anand talk about what enables him to perform analysis at such a speed.

In the telemarketing case-study, the most important question was to identify the most important customer segments. It turns out that this type of analysis is one of the most widely used in the industry, primarily because it leads to actionable insights. 

 

It is important to remember that analytics is useful only when it can be used by the business. It doesn't matter if you have a lot of data and sophisticated analytics tools; if the analysis doesn't lead to actionable business insights, it is useless.

 

Thus, it is important for you to ask the right questions before starting the analysis. Anand will talk about a few things to keep in mind while doing so.

In the telemarketing case-study, the most important question was to identify the most important customer segments. It turns out that this type of analysis is one of the most widely used in the industry, primarily because it leads to actionable insights. 

 

It is important to remember that analytics is useful only when it can be used by the business. It doesn't matter if you have a lot of data and sophisticated analytics tools; if the analysis doesn't lead to actionable business insights, it is useless.

 

Thus, it is important for you to ask the right questions before starting the analysis. Anand will talk about a few things to keep in mind while doing so.

You saw that the most common analytics questions are similar across industries - which are the top 10 'x'.

For example, in our case-study, we wanted to know the top customer segments based on their propensity to buy a bank's loan product. 

 

In the next few segments, you will learn data visualisation and ways to use plots to explore and present data.  

Creating and Formatting Charts
Charts and visualisations are how data analysts communicate with the business. You may have seen presentations made by managers, CEOs and analysts etc. Charts are widely used because they are simple to understand and communicate the key information quickly.   

 

In this segment, you'll learn how to plot charts in Excel. 

It is important to understand that data visualisations can be used in two ways- 1) to explore insights in the data and 2) to present insights to other people. A typical presentation contains the latter type. While analysing data, you can (and should) use charts to understand patterns and trends. In fact, conditional formatting is also a type of data visualisation and is usually used to explore data.  

 

In the next segment, you will learn to plot a few more types of charts.

Types of Charts
Excel offers a wide range of charts like line charts, pie charts, scatter plots etc. and it is natural to get overwhelmed with the choice. Thus, it is helpful to understand the pros and cons of the various chart types.

 To summarise the most important thumb rules to choose charts:

Bar charts are used when one variable is categorical and one is numeric, e.g. marital status (3 categories) and age
Stacked bar charts (or simply stacked charts) are used when there are more than one categorical variables, e.g. marital status and gender plotted in two different colours 
Line charts are also used with one categorical variable and one numeric variable
If time is a variable to be plotted, it almost always plotted on the x-axis of a line chart
 Pie charts have poor readability and thus you should avoid using them
Scatter plots are used when you want to plot two numeric variables e.g. age and income
You can add transparency in scatter plots to improve readability  
In the following lecture, you will see a few more charts and try to answer the questions - when should which chart should be used?

Despite having a wide range of options of chart types, the most commonly used ones are bar charts, line charts and scatter plots. The reason is that these are easy to read. In fact, pie charts sometimes decrease the readability of data!

 

In the next lecture, you will see why pie charts are usually terrible and the cases in which line / bar / scatter charts work best.

With this, you have reached the end of Data Visualisation in Excel. You can now choose an appropriate chart for presenting information in a readable manner. Remember that the most important principle of creating charts is that they should improve readability and reduce the time taken to understand the key pieces of information.
