Evaluation Rubric
Evaluation Rubric

Criteria
	

Meets expectations
	

Does not meet expectations

Data understanding and preparation (10%)
	

All data quality issues are correctly identified and reported.
 

The unique keys and number of unique entries are correctly identified.
 

The files are collated correctly to create a master file.

 	

Data quality issues are overlooked or are not identified correctly.
 

Unique keys or values are not understood/identified correctly.
 

The master file is not created / incorrectly created.

Cleaning and manipulating data (25%)
	

Data quality issues are addressed in the right way (missing value treatment etc.).
 

If applicable, data is converted to a suitable and convenient format to work with using the right methods.
 

Manipulation of dates and strings, if required, is done using correct and concise techniques/code.
	

Data quality issues are not addressed correctly.
 

The variables are not converted to an appropriate format for analysis. The format of data is not altered to a convenient one and as a result, the analysis is done using longer methods / involves complex steps.
 

String and date manipulation is not done correctly or is done using complex methods.

Data analysis (35%)
	

The analysis has a clear structure and the flow is easy to understand.
 

The funding, country and sector wise analysis are done correctly and according to the instructions. Appropriate realistic assumptions are made wherever required.

The use cases of aggregation, drill down, slicing, dicing etc. operations are correctly identified and conducted in Python.  
 

The investment type, list of countries and the sectors is correct.
 

Appropriate plots are created to present the results of the analysis. The choice of plots for respective cases is correct. The plots should clearly present the relevant insights and should be easy to read. The axes and important data points are labelled correctly.

 	

The analysis lacks a clear structure and is not easy to follow.
 

The three types of analysis are not conducted correctly and the results are incorrect.
 

Realistic assumptions are not made wherever required or unrealistic ones are made.
 

The aggregation, drill down, slicing, dicing etc. operations are not performed correctly.
 

The investment type, list of countries and the sectors is incorrect.
 

All relevant plots are not created. The choice of plots is not ideal and the plots are either difficult to interpret or lack clarity or neatness. Relevant insights are not clearly presented by the plots. The axes and important data points are not labelled correctly / are not neatly labelled.

Presentation of results (20%)
	

The presentation has a clear structure, is not too long and explains the most important results concisely.
 

If any assumptions are made, they are stated clearly.
	

The presentation lacks structure, is too long or does not put emphasis on the important observations.
 

Contains unnecessary details or lacks the important ones.
 

Assumptions made, if any, are not stated clearly.

Conciseness and readability of the code (10%)
	

The code is concise and syntactically correct.
 

Wherever appropriate, built-in functions are used instead of writing long code (if-else statements, for loops).
 

The code is readable with variables appropriately named and detailed comments are written wherever necessary.
	

Long and complex code used instead of shorter built-in functions.
 

Code readability is poor because of vaguely named variables or lack of comments wherever necessary.

Final Submission

The deadline for submission of this assignment is Nov 4, 11:59:00 PM IST. For submissions obtained within 1 week of the deadline, there will be a 30% penalty. Submissions beyond 1 week of the deadline will be provided only feedback and score zero marks (100% penalty).

 

You must go through these guidelines-

 

    Make sure you have not made any changes to the original dataset provided to you. Your Python code should work on the dataset given to you as part of the problem statement. You are not allowed to make modifications in data set using excel and then use it in your Python code. Entire data processing must be done in Python only. During grading we will be running your code on the dataset provided by us, in case your code gives errors with that, then marks will be deducted accordingly.

    All penalties are automatically applied by the system based on time of submission. Hence, submissions that are late, even by a second, will attract penalties.

For e.g.- If the deadline is 2nd August 2017, 11:59:00 PM IST, the submissions at 2nd August 2017, 11:59:01 PM IST will attract a penalty of 30%. Hence we recommend that assignments are submitted at least 30 minutes before the deadline to avoid any last minute issues.

 

Also, note the all the deadlines are in IST (UTC +5.5), hence, if you are in a different time zone, then your deadline may vary according to local time. For eg - If you are in London and following BST (British Summer Time) which is UTC +1 then deadline for you in local time would be 7:29:00 PM BST when the deadline in India is 11:59:00 PM IST.

    Make sure you click “Submit for Grading” only if you are 100% sure, else you must just upload your file and leave it there. It will be automatically submitted before the deadline. If you click “Submit for grading” after uploading the file, under no circumstance you will be allowed to resubmit or change your upload.

 

Here are the steps that you must follow during submitting any assignment-

    Collect all the files (if there are multiple files) and compress them together.

    Try to upload this compressed file latest by 11:30 PM

    Download your submission and check that you have included all the required files.

    Check that none of the files or the zip is corrupt. If it is found to be corrupt during grading, you will NOT be allowed to re-submit.

    If you are 100% sure that you will not need to make any more changes in the assignment, click “Submit for Grading”, else, just let it be. Unless you remove it, it will be automatically submitted at the upcoming deadline.

