Star Schema

Facts and dimensions are the two key elements of dimension modelling. A typical problem might involve multiple databases with many different variables and we may not be interested in all the variables. Hence, only some facts and dimensions are combined in a specific manner to create the structure of data warehouse. This structure is called as a schema diagram. 


A schema is an outline of the entire data warehouse. It shows how different data sets are connected and the different attributes of each data being used for the data warehouse.

 

In this lecture, you will see an example of how an e-commerce company can design a data warehouse. 

You learnt about star schema in the above video. Though there are other kinds of schema available, the star schema is the most widely used. You can read more about other schema types in the link provided under additional reading.

 

Additional References:

    Click here to read more about dimension modelling techniques -https://www.kimballgroup.com/data-warehouse-business-intelligence-resources/kimball-techniques/dimensional-modeling-techniques/
    Click here to read more about types of schemas - https://www.folkstalk.com/2010/01/data-warehouse-dimensional-modelling.html
    
    Questions:1/1
 
Star Schema

Which of the following can be attributes in the date dimension table?
Day of the week
Feedback : This attribute will tell what day of the week it is.
Correct
Holiday Flag
Feedback : This attribute will tell whether there is a holiday on this day or not.
CorrectYou missed this!
Quarter
Feedback : This attribute will tell which quarter the date falls in.
Correct
Month
Feedback : This attribute will tell what month the date falls in. All these attributes can help us analyse the data much more deeply compared to just having the date.

Questions:1/1
 
Star Schema

In a star schema, what is the name of the table that contains metadata needed for analysing numerical/quantitative data?
Fact table
Dimension table
Feedback :
Dimension variables describe the fact data - they are data about data
Correct
Star table
Constellation table
Feedback :
Metadata is data about data. It describes the numerical data which is present. Which table contains this data?

How to Use a Star Schema - A Demonstration
Startup Funding
file_downloadDownload

Based on the startup funding data attached above, answer the questions that follow:

Questions:1/1
 
Using Star Schema

Open the Investments and Companies data sets. Look at the various facts and dimension attributes. Come up with at least 3 business questions that can be asked, given these data sets.

1. Who are the top 3 investors from USA with based on funds raised over last 10 years
2. Who are the top 5 Indian companies who got highest funding
3.  What type/category of business in US are getting highest funding/investments in last 15 years?  who among them top the list?

Based on the queries that you asked, can you think of a schema which could help you solve those questions?

 

Some of the questions that can be asked are:

    Is there any pattern in funding received - does a particular funding round attract more funding?
    Do investors prefer companies located in their own region?
    Do certain categories of companies attract more funding than others? Which category attracts the maximum funding?

One sample star schema of the investment data which can solve the above questions is as follows: 

Star Schema in an E-commerce Company

 

Let's extend the e-commerce company's example we saw previously. Suppose you work in an e-commerce company which uses a data warehouse to store data related to various dimensions such as customers, products, website, shipping, etc. 

 

Given below is a fact table which contains attributes such as date (of order), time, customer_key (ID), product_key, location_key, discount amount, etc. Connected to the fact table, there are a number of dimension tables (not shown below), e.g. customer dimension, promotion dimension, etc.

The CEO of the company has some interesting questions in mind, some of which are listed below. Think about the dimension tables and the attributes in those tables that you should have in the schema to be able to answer these questions: 

    What is the average number of orders per day delivered by two wheelers in a certain locality of Bangalore (e.g. Jayanagar, Bangalore)?
    What is the average amount of sales per day in Whitefield, Bangalore in the mornings (8 am - 11 am)? 
    How many orders were placed on holidays using at least one promotional coupon?

In the text box below, briefly mention the names of the dimension tables and the attributes that would help you answer these questions.

Questions:1/1
 
Star Schema of an E-commerce Company

Mention the names of the dimension tables and the component attributes that would help you answer the questions. You may use the structure below (your answer may include any number of dimension tables):

Dimension table 1

List of attributes

Dimension table 2

List of attributes

Dimension table 3

List of attributes

And so on

You will now see how the star schema can be used to solve actual business problems. This demonstration will also give you a reference solution to the question asked above. You will find the star schema used on page 16 of the following reference text: 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2359314_Data_Warehouse_Design_for_E-Commerce_Environment

Company_Dimension
CompanyID
Company_Region
Company_Started
Company_Last_Fund_Recvd

Investor_Dimension
InvestorID
InvestorName
InvestorRegion
InvestedDate

Funding_Dimension
FundingID
FundingType
FundingDate
FundAmount

You saw how a star schema can be used for solving business problems. Various dimensions and attributes such as time, customer address, transportation type, etc. can be combined with the star schema to identify the most common transportation mode in the mornings in a certain locality.

 

Now that you know what a schema diagram is, let's move on to seeing how data can be transferred from various databases into a central data warehouse.

Data Warehouse Schema- Industry Example

You have already learnt about dimensional modelling and schema diagrams. In this session, you will see a real life example of how a data warehouse was built for UpGrad. This session will give you a good idea about the life cycle of designing a data warehouse, right from the selection of dimensions to deploying the data warehouse for analysis. Given below is the schema used in the video. 

Refer Upgrad Schema Png

The marketing team at UpGrad wanted to analyse marketing touch points and know the profile of customers. Keeping these requirements in mind, suitable fact and dimension tables were created with appropriate attributes, i.e. the attributes important for the use cases in hand. 

 

As you can notice, some dimension tables contain information on lead (prospective customer) details, date and time of interaction, education, location, work details etc. These dimension variables collate information from a variety of sources and make it available for analysis. 

 

Some examples of useful analysis that can be done using this data are:

    Profiling (or segmenting) the leads into 'clusters' e.g. 'students', 'mid-level employees' etc. 
    Predicting the likelihood of conversion for each lead using machine learning models
    Day-to-day reporting within the sales and marketing teams

 

The variety of attributes and dimensions heavily determines what the warehouse can be used for. In this case, most attributes are chosen to enhance the amount and quality of information mainly from a marketing perspective. 

Questions:1/1
 
Use Cases of a Data Warehouse

Deepak mentioned that the use cases of a data warehouse play an important role in its design. For example, lead scoring  (assigning a 'score' to each lead indicating his propensity to buy), user profiling etc. are some of the use cases which may influence the design of the warehouse.

Which property of data warehouse design does this correspond to?
Subject-oriented
Feedback :
Subject oriented implies that the warehouse be built for a specific range of purposes. User profiling, predictive scoring etc. are examples of purposes or 'subjects' for which a warehouse may be designed.
Correct
Non-volatile
Time invariant

Session Summary

In this session, you learnt about what a data warehouse is and the difference between a data warehouse and a transactional database. You learnt that OLAP systems are Subject-oriented, Integrated, Non-volatile and Time variant. 

 

You learnt that the data warehouse gives an integrated view of the entire organisation and the data is organised for efficiently carrying out analysis. You also learnt the difference between a data warehouse and a transactional database.

 

You also learnt about facts and dimensions. You also learnt how to arrange facts and dimensions to design a data warehouse. You saw how dimension tables act as the metadata that is the data about data and they enhance the facts table to enhance insights about the data.

 

You further learnt through the example of the Upgrad schema.
