Understanding Basic Chart Types I

Let us now learn the various types of basic plots which are most often used by analysts.

 

In this video, you will learn about the attributes that make graphics more appealing and informative. You will also hear about the types of visualisations and the suitability of different charts for different types of information.

You saw that pre-attentive attributes make graphics easy to understand whereas attentive attributes are relatively difficult to grasp.

 

You also learnt about line charts, bar charts, histograms, pie charts, stack bar charts, and also understood when to use them and what their limitations are. While a line chart can be used to present a time-dependent trend, bar graphs and histograms are best used for categorical and continuous data respectively. A pie chart best summarises the share of different components in an aggregate whole, while a stacked bar chart is used to compare the share and contribution of categories across different sectors.

 

So now, you have some basic understanding of when to use this type of graph. You can refer to some of the pointers regarding pie charts in the Additional References section below.

 

Additional References

    Pointers related to pie-charts  -https://blog.socialcops.com/academy/resources/5-things-know-make-pie-chart/
    
    Pie Charts

In which of the following cases would a pie chart be ineffective in displaying percentages? Only one option is correct.
The number of pies is too low (2 or 3)
The number of pies is too high (e.g. 15)
Feedback :
If the number of categories is too high, then it would be difficult to represent all of them on a pie chart, since the area of representation remains the same, while the number of slices of the pie chart increases.
Correct
The number of pies is between 4-8

Understanding Basic Chart Types II

In the last segment, we covered line charts, bar charts, histograms,  pie charts and stacked bar charts. Now, let's cover:

    Scatter plot
    Box plot
    Grouped bar chart

A box plot is suitable to represent the quartile, percentile and outliers values, whereas a scatter plot summarises the variation of data points across two dimensions or two parameters. A grouped bar chart is best suited to present different sub-groups among the main categories.


Additional References

    You can check this link from Gramener to know how data visualisation can help you derive insights about winning political parties in India --https://gramener.com/posters/Winning-Parties.pdf

    You can also view this link from SocialCops for a cool visualisation on the ageing world population --https://blog.socialcops.com/intelligence/aging-population/

    You can refer to this link to decide which graph to choose for your data -https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/types-of-graphs-for-data-visualization#sm.000vodl7ch6rf7e112a2q13r9cno0
    
    
    Questions:1/1
 
Types of plots

Which of the following plots can be used to show the relation between two quantitative variables?

1. Box plot

2. Line plot

3. Scatter plot

4. Histogram
1 and 2
2 and 3
Feedback :
Line plot and Scatter plot essentially plot the x-y relationship between the two quantitative variables. They show how one variable changes with the other quantitative variable.
Correct
2 and 4
1 and 4

 
Summary: Data Visualisation

 

This session was an introduction to the world of data visualisations. Let's summarise all that you learnt in this session.

 

You started with understanding the importance of visualisation for data understanding. Then, we covered the differences between the attentive and pre-attentive attributes, to understand the factors that make a visual stand out among the rest.  

 

You glanced through the different types of graphs and charts:

    Line chart
    Bar chart
    Histogram
    Pie chart
    Stacked bar chart
    Scatter plot
    Box plot
    Grouped bar chart

You covered the main areas of application and the limitations of all these chart types. You also saw an industry demonstration of how data visualisation can help you easily understand complex and large data.

 

In the next session, you will learn how to create some of these graphics and visuals using Python.
