Box Plots

Another very important and powerful visualisation technique available in Tableau is box plots. They enable us to study the distributional characteristics of a variable. Box plots are used to show overall patterns of a variable. They provide a useful way to visualise the range and other characteristics of a variable such as median, quartiles, outliers etc. An important feature of box plots is that they can only be created for numerical data. In the following lecture, prof RC will explain more about the characteristics, workings, and interpretations of box plots.

Box plots are an extremely powerful tool to visualise the variability in data. They tell you about the existence of outliers and the overall spread of the data. They are also very effective when you want to compare the distribution of two quantitative variables. The line inside the box denotes the median value: 50% of the data lies both above and below that value. The boundaries of the box denote the 25th and the 75th percentile, with the whiskers denoting the lowest and the highest values in the data set. Any observations lying below or above the whiskers are considered to be outliers. Outliers are the data points which have absurdly high or low values, compared to the values of the rest of the observations. Watch the lecture below to understand how to create box plots in Tableau.

 

Box Plots I -https://www.tableau.com/learn/tutorials/on-demand/reference-lines
Box Plots II -  https://www.tableau.com/learn/tutorials/on-demand/box-plots

 

Excercise:

    Compare the distribution of average balance using the response as the dimension variable.

    To the graphic generated in the previous question, add the dimension ‘job’ as colour to the plot.

 

Questions:1/1
Box Plot - Median

Report the job category closest to the median value of average balance for both no and yes types of response respectively.
Entrepreneur, Entrepreneur
Entrepreneur, House maid
House maid, Entrepreneur
Correct
House maid, Technician
