Scatter Plots and Pie Charts

If you want to plot two quantitative variables against each other or two quantitative variables on a categorical variable, then scatter plot is a very good option. In the following lecture, Prof RC will explain why.

A scatter plot gives you the freedom to compare the values of the two quantitative variables you have plotted, for every available point on the graph. You will typically use a scatter plot when you want to investigate relationships between quantitative variables, like age and income.

 

You can also add categorical variables to the shape and size options in the Marks Card, to make a scatter plot more informative and interactive. Sometimes, when the number of points being displayed in a scatter plot is too large, the plot becomes too cluttered and a different visualisation technique (such as a stacked bar chart) should be used. Watch the following lecture to understand how to create scatter plots in Tableau.

You can download the Tableau worksheet used in the lecture from below:
Scatterplot Worksheet
file_downloadDownload

Another powerful charting option available to you in Tableau is a pie chart. Pie charts are very useful for summarising categorical variables or dimensions. They give you the freedom to look at the counts and summarise grouped data. For example, a pie chart would be good to visualise the count of products sold from each category or the count of products sold from each store in the city. A pie chart represents a dimension variable, and the size of each pie represents the count of each category. To learn more about how to create a pie chart in Tableau watch the following lecture:

You can download the Tableau worksheet used in the lecture from below:
Pie Chart Worksheet
file_downloadDownload

Use Bank Marketing dataset to answer the following qustions.

Questions:1/1
Scatterplot

For what salary, is the average balance of response = yes lower than the average balance of response = no? Plot a scatterplot to answer the question.
4000
8000
16000
55000
